This paper intends to find an approach to obtain the values
of the parameters that govern polymer growth. In order to
do this several variations of genetic algorithms have been
explored. These are: different selection methods applied on
a basic genetic algorithm, island model and fitness diversity
driven co-evolution. It was found that, on average, the basic
genetic algorithm needed 77 generations, the island model
41 generations and fitness diversity driven co-evolution 20
generations. Thus the latter was most suited to find a solution
in the search space containing many different optima.
II. INTRODUCTION
Polymers, these materials are constructed from chains of
repeating, smaller chemical units. We deal with them on a
daily basis in the form of plastics or rubber. But they are also
in our bodies as proteins and even our DNA.
Polymers have a wide variety of applications and they can
be tailored to their intended usage. They can be stiffer like,
for example, plastic bottles or flexible like nylon and polyester
which we find in our clothing. In this paper however, we
will focus on the medical uses. Medicine can be attached
to polymers which will then have to be injected into the
bloodstream. By altering the length of the polymers to which
the medication will be connected, it is possible to better control
how quickly the attached medicine is released into the body. If
they are too short, then the kidneys will process the polymers
and the medication before it can be distributed throughout the
body and even damage the kidneys. If they are too long, then
the body will treat it as a foreign object which would result
in poisoning the patient. However, there is a middle ground
where the polymers are not destroyed before they can do their
task and before they become dangerous to the patient. To
control the lengths properly we want to be able to look at
data from real polymer synthesis experiments and understand
the parameters that generate the observed distribution.
In previous work a simulation of the polymer growth
has been developed [1]. This simulation has ten different
parameters which can be tuned and are used as inputs together
with the target data that is being learned. Each run of the
simulation outputs a distribution of polymer lengths of both
the target data and the simulated data generated from the
parameters. We want to develop an approach to find the values
of these parameters that give the best fit for any given real
data set. For this, several variants of genetic algorithms will
be used. Specifically: various selection methods [2] used by
a genetic algorithm [3]–[5], distributed genetic algorithms or
island model [6], co-evolution [7] and fitness diversity driven
co-evolution [8].
III. METHODS AND MATERIALS
Several methods have been explored in order to find which
parameter values are successful in generating a polymer pool
closely resembling the target data with the use of the simula-
tion.
As stated earlier, all of them are an adaptation of a genetic
algorithm. Genetic algorithms are an approach to unsupervised
learning and rely on their own fitness function to determine the
quality of a solution. Its process can be described as follows.
First, an initial population is created and each individual is
provided a fitness based on how well they performed. In
our case, this value represents how well the simulated data
matched the target data. Next, two parents are selected from
the population with the use of a selection method, which will
be discussed later. From the selected parents, a new individual,
or child, is created with the use of crossover and mutation
operators. The crossover used in this paper is two-point
crossover. The mutation is performed by slightly adjusting a
parameter value with a chance of 60 percent and randomly
generating it with a chance of 40 percent. Next, a fitness
is given to the child in the same way the initial population
was. If the child’s fitness is greater than the minimum fitness
of the population then the child is added to the population
while the individual with the minimum fitness is removed.
Alternatively, before choosing the parents, the population is
halved by eliminating the individuals with the lowest fitness.
After this, children are produced as stated before until the
population is back to its original size. This process is repeated
until a satisfactory solution has been found or is stopped earlier
if a time limit has been set.
A. Simulation
One of the main tools that was used for this paper is the
simulation [1]. The simulation is a stochastic process which
replicates and visualizes the creation of polymers using as
inputs the ten parameters that the algorithm trying to solve
the problem provides.
Fig. 1: visualization of the reactions. Provided by Bryn D.
Monnery.
The simulation is an agent-based simulation of the syn-
thesis of Poly(2-ethyl-2-oxaline) (PEtOx). Where each chain
is represented as an agent and for some given probabilities
it has the opportunity to undergo one of several reactions.
The simulated polymerisation reaction is a living process,
meaning that the concentration of active centres, a.k.a. the
agents, will be constant throughout the reaction. However, as
can be seen in figure 1 part 1, the propagation and transfer
reactions are locked in competition. A transferred chain can
no longer undergo propagation reactions and becomes ’dead’.
However, they are still able to undergo ’vampiric’ reactions
with a living chain as shown in figure 1 part 2. It is unknown
what the probabilities for these reactions are and they might
even differ between experiments. Estimating from real data
the values of both these probabilities and the ones mentioned
in table I is the central goal of this paper.1
a
a
monomer
new polymer of length one is spawned or not.
TABLE I: Parameters
1This paragraph was adapted from text provided by Rachel Cavill and Bryn
D. Monnery.
parameter explanation
simulation time Time for the simulation to run in time steps.
number of molecules The number of starting points for polymers to
begin.
monomer pool The amount of monomers present in the simula-
tion.
probability of growth
(pg )
The chance for each monomer to increase in
length at each time step.
probability of death
(pd)
The chance for each monomer to no longer be
able to increase in length at each time step.
probability of death
reaction (pdr )
The chance for a dead monomer to react with living one at each time step.
living exponent (le) The exponent of the living length in the proba-
bility calculation for successful coupling.
death exponent (de) The exponent of the dead length in the probability
calculation for successful coupling.
living naked(ln) The ratio of parts of the polymer which are
accessible to reactions due to them being located
on the outside of the polymer
death spawns new
A binary flag as to whether a kill event means 2
Some of these parameters are used to decide on the initial
values that are used in the simulation such as simulation time,
number of molecules and monomer pool. Others are used to
determine the fate of the chains during the simulation. The first
equation computes the monomer ratio which tells us how large
the current monomer pool is compared to the initial monomer
pool size. The initial monomer pool size is one of the inputs.
The monomer ratio is used in the equations that determine
whether a living chain should grow, as well as which should
perish.
current monomer pool
monomer ratio=
initial monomer pool (1)
To find out if a chain will grow we need the following
equation to hold.
r < pg ∗ monomer ratio (2)
Where r is a random value and pg is probability of growth. A
chain will perish if the following two equations hold.
r < pg ∗ monomer ratio +
pd ∗ monomer ratio (3)
r >= pg ∗ monomer ratio (4)
where pd is probability of death.
After a chain was found to be ’dead’ it is still able to attack
a living chain, in which case it becomes a ’vampiric’ chain.
The chance of a ’dead’ chain successfully attacking a living
chain is given by:
p success = pdr /
(l livingmin(l living∗( le
ln ), le ) ∗
(5)
l vampiricmin(l vampiric∗( de
ln ), de ))
Where pdr is probability of dead reaction, l living is the
length of the living chain that is being attacked, le is living
exponent, ln is living naked, l vampiric is the length of
the attacking dead chain and de is death exponent. Other
then l living and l vampiric the variables are explained in
table I. If an attack fails then the vampiric chain will simply
remain dead.
As mentioned before the simulation is stochastic, meaning
that the same input can yield different results. This is in
line with reality but also increases the difficulty level for the
genetic algorithm. This is caused by the feedback being less
reliable as an individual can get a very good score whilst
not actually being that good or vice versa. Additionally, the
algorithm only has influence over the input variables but not
over the process that they are used in, resulting in a situation
where an individual can simply get lucky or unlucky. However,
there are ways of limiting the influence of luck by reducing the
standard deviation of the simulation. By increasing the number
of molecules one can make the simulation more reproducible.
As the number of molecules in the simulation go up, the
standard deviation of the score goes down and this continues to
go down up until 50,000 molecules. Any higher and the results
stay roughly the same. Unfortunately, the time necessary for
number of
molecules
standard de-
viation
time (s)
1,000 341.895 10.670
10,000 47.687 17.489
20,000 17.753 23.329
30,000 6.075 29.851
40,000 3.008 35.473
50,000 2.102 40.650
60,000 2.489 45.924
computing a generation of 50 individuals goes up as well. As
can be seen in table II.
70,000 2.467 50.862
TABLE II: Number of molecules and corresponding standard
deviation
Another way of reducing the standard deviation is by
running the same individual multiple times and taking the
average of the different scores that were obtained. In Table
II, the individuals have been run multiple times with 50,000
molecules.
number of
repeats
3 5 10 standard de-
viation
1.347 1.106 0.790 time (s)
95.903
155.585
315.843
TABLE III: number of repeats and corresponding standard
deviation
From table III we can see that increasing the number of runs
for each individual reduced the standard deviation. Moreover,
by combining the two methods, the standard deviation can be
brought below one. While this is desirable, it comes at a steep
cost, being the amount of time it takes for one generation to
be completed.
B. Data
The data sets that we want learn the parameter values
for were provided by Dr.Bryn D. Monnery [9]. In total, six
preprocessed data sets were received. During development
however, when trying to learn the data sets it became
apparent that due to the data having been preprocessed with
a band-broadening algorithm, the resulting distributions were
narrower than was possible to obtain with the simulation.
Thus the data was not reproducible by the simulation and the
genetic algorithms were unable to learn it.
New data sets were received where the band-broadening
algorithm had been turned off. While this data better repre-
sented the actual polymer pool, it still was not perfect due to
measurement errors. This was most notable in the tails of the
graphs generated from the data. This results in the algorithm
trying to learn information that is not correct, creating a similar
problem as earlier where the simulation might not be able to
reproduce the data.
C. Generated Data
Due to the issues mentioned in the previous section, it was
decided to test the approaches on new data sets generated
3
from the simulation. This would guarantee that the data is
reproducible and a known solution could be found, making
it more suitable to use for both development and testing.
However, problems are expected to also be less complicated
than fitting the real data.
D. Fitness Functions
In order to provide the genetic algorithms with feedback,
a fitness function is required which examines the absolute
difference between each point in the simulated data and
the target data. The simulated data gives a distribution of
polymer lengths by counting the number of polymers of each
length precisely, whereas the real data is produced through
measurements. Both will give the same distribution, but not
on the same scale. In order to compare the two distributions, a
normalisation procedure was needed. The selected procedure
was min max normalization.
Min max normalization uses the minimum and maximum
values of a data set to normalize the data to be on a scale
from zero to one. In our data, the minimum value is always
zero. Therefore, all values from a data set are simply divided
by the maximum value from that set. The formula is:
vi− min(V )
xi =
max(V )− min(V ) (6)
Where min and max are the minimum and maximum values
of the set V with range, v = (v1...vn), vi is the ith data point
of the data set which is being normalized and vi converts to
xi. Therefore, xi is now the ith normalized data point.
E. Selection Methods
The first approach that was explored was the use of
different selection methods. They are used to determine
which of the individuals will be selected to reproduce an
offspring and consequently are allowed to carry over their
genetic information to the next generation. The selection
pressure changes depending of which method is used. This
pressure alters how a genetic algorithm explores the search
space. If the pressure is high then the current best solutions
will be exploited and less of the search space will be explored
while also diminishing the genetic diversity. Whereas low
pressure will cause the algorithm to explore more of the
search space and thus preserve the genetic diversity but it will
not utilize the best solution as much causing the algorithm to
converge more slowly. Finding a balance between exploitation
and exploration is important.
• Tournament
The first selection method that is used is tournament
selection. In tournament selection [2], N individuals are
pit against each other and the individual with the highest
fitness wins and is selected. The advantage of this
method is that the selection pressure can be manually
changed by altering how many individuals take part in
a tournament (N). The more individuals that participate
the higher the selection pressure becomes since the
chance of an individual with a high fitness participating
increases.
• Roulette wheel
The second selection method is Roulette wheel selection
[2]. This is possibly the most well known selection
method as it is simple and intuitive. Every individual’s
fitness is proportionate to the chance of them being
selected. The selection pressure is generally quite high
especially when the fitness of the better solutions is con-
siderably higher. This would result in more exploitation.
The probability for each individual to be chosen is given
by:
pi =
fi
sum(F ) (7)
Where pi is the probability of the ith individual being
selected, fi is the fitness of the ith individual and sum of
F is the sum of every individual’s fitness.
• Rank
The third selection method is Rank selection [2]. This
method has a low selection pressure and thus promotes
exploration. This has the advantage that it will not get
stuck as quickly but convergence to a more optimal
solution is slower as well. To compute the probability for
each individual to be selected is done by first ordering the
individuals based on their fitness. The higher the fitness
the higher their rank will be and the higher their rank,
the higher their probability of being selected will be. This
method uses the fitness to determine which individual is
better but ignores how much better they are which is the
cause for the low selection pressure. The probability for
each individual to be chosen is given by:
pi =
Rank(i)
N ∗ (N− 1) (8)
Where pi is the probability of individual i, Rank(i) is
the rank of the ith individual and N is the total number
of individuals.
• Boltzmann
The fifth and final selection method is Boltzmann selec-
tion [2]. This method has the benefit of being able to
change the selection pressure over time. At the start of
the run the selection pressure is very low allowing the
algorithm to explore. By the end of the run the selection
pressure will be high and trying to improve on the things
it has found during the exploration phase. The probability
for each individual to be chosen is given by:
max(f )− fi
pi = exp(−
T ) (9)
Where pi is the probability of the ith individual, max(f)
is the maximum value of all individuals’ fitness and
T= T0(1− a)k (10)
4
Where a is between 0 and 1 and it determines how quickly
T decreases and
g
k = 1 + 100 ∗
G (11)
Where g is the current generation and G is the total
amount of generations that will be run.
F. Island Model
The second approach is the island model [6]. The island
model allows for multiple genetic algorithms, or islands, to be
run simultaneously. They can either be completely separate
from each other or they interact via migration or cross breed-
ing. Meaning individuals from one island can move over to
another or reproduce with an individual from another island.
If there is no interaction then each island will follow their own
evolutionary path and at the end, every island’s best individuals
will be compared and the best will be selected as the final
solution. If there is interaction then generally this only happens
every few generations. This is to allow the new migrants to
interbreed with the original population before introducing new
individuals. If the islands do interact then this allows for them
to support each other and mix their possible solutions. This can
cause an island that is stuck in a local optima to be stimulated
to get out of it as well as allowing different islands to try and
improve upon the current best solution. In the program that is
used to solve our problem, the latter option was chosen as it
would provide the algorithm with more opportunities.
It should be noted however that how the different genetic algo-
rithms interact can differ. Meaning it is possible to connect the
islands (genetic algorithms) in multiple ways. Some options
are: fully connected, circular, chain and star; as illustrated by
Figure 2.
(a) fully connected (b) circular
(c) chain
(d) star
Fig. 2: possible island connections
If its fully connected then from every island, some indi-
viduals will move to the other islands. if it is circular then
individuals will only move to the next island in the line, mind
you that circular is in one direction and not to both sides.
Similarly to circular if it is a chain then individuals will only
propagate forward however the first and last islands in the
chain are not connected. Finally if it is a star shape then there
is one island that will receive new individuals while the others
only send.
The advantage of using the island model over a single ge-
netic algorithm is that this allows for several algorithms, each
5
with their own settings i.e. mutation rate, selection method
and population size, to run simultaneously and cooperate. For
example: in the chain connection the algorithm at the bottom
will use a selection function with low selection pressure to
promote exploration and will push alternate solutions to the
next algorithm in the chain. Whereas the algorithm at the top
of the chain will have a selection method with high selection
pressure to make use of the possible different solution and
exploit them as much as possible to find the best solution.
Consequently different evolutionary branches are followed by
each algorithm but are combined during migration [4].
G. Co-evolution
Another method that seemed relevant for the problem of
finding the correct values was co-evolution [7]. Co-evolution
is a variation on genetic algorithms where instead of using one
population, two or more are used. These populations can then
either work against each other (predator-prey) [10] or with
each other (symbiotic) [11]. In this paper, the populations will
be pit against each other. One population will consist of the
possible solutions. Meaning each individual’s genes are made
up of the parameter values. And the other population will make
up the problems, their genes are made up of the sigma values.
Sigma values are used to determine how important different
parts of the data are. It is used by first splitting the data into
bins and computing the cost for each bin. This cost is then
multiplied by its corresponding sigma value.
To initialize the populations, every individual from the
solution population will be run against an individual from the
problem population, this is called an encounter. When the run
is completed and the cost value is computed the problem will
get this value as their fitness and the solution will get this
cost multiplied by minus one as their fitness. Each individual
will have a total of 10 encounters which will make up their
memory. The number 10 is arbitrary. The original paper [7]
chose 20 but this took too much time so this value was halved.
The advantage of using such a memory is that an individual
is not just dependent on whether or not they were lucky or
unlucky when their opponent was selected. This also allows
for their fitness to change over their life span due to the 10
new encounters that take place every generation in which each
individual has a chance to participate in. For each encounter,
two individuals are selected using rank selection causing the
better individuals to challenge each other. When such an
encounter takes place, the new fitness will be added to the
participating individuals and another fitness will be deleted in
a first in first out (FIFO) manner. As mentioned earlier, these
encounters cause the fitness of the participating individuals
to change. So, if a solution was considered good before but
now not as much, its fitness will decrease causing its rank to
decrease as well. This allows other individuals who might be
better suited against the current opponents to be selected more
frequently for either reproduction or encounters.
After the encounters have taken place, two individuals from
each population will be selected to reproduce one child. This
child will then have 10 encounters and if their overall score is
better than the score of the worst individual of their respective
population, they will be added and the worst individual will
be eliminated. This cycle continues until time runs out or an
acceptable error is reached.
A co-evolutionary algorithm can be slightly tweaked to turn
it into fitness-diversity driven co-evolution [8]. This algorithm
essentially combines novelty search [12] and co-evolution
without there being a need for an archive to keep track
of which individuals have existed previously. The difference
between this and regular co-evolution is that one of the two
populations will be assigned a different fitness value and
ranking based on how different they are from their nearest
neighbour. This is done by first ranking the individuals like
normal based on their fitness. Next, a new fitness is assigned
to each individual, this new fitness is computed by looking at
the individuals that are next to it in the ranking and taking
the difference between their original fitness. The smallest of
these differences will become the new fitness of the current
individual. The higher this value the higher its rank will be.
This promotes the population to become more diverse and
in turn helps to prevent the algorithm from getting stuck in
local optima. Another benefit is that this avoids the potential
deception created by the fitness function. This deception
could otherwise cause the algorithm to converge prematurely.
It can occur when the fitness function does not correctly
or completely encapsulate the problem. It is also effective
in preventing one algorithm from becoming too strong too
quickly, which would prevent a step-wise competition as one
algorithm would dominate the other. Co-evolution relies on
this competition to work effectively.
The advantage of co-evolution compared to a standard
genetic algorithm is that in co-evolution the two populations
force each other to come up with better strategies to solve the
challenge posed by their opponents. To put this into context
of our problem, this means that the problem population uses
the sigma to point out areas in the data that are not well
matched and tries to increase the cost value for the solution
population. This in turn forces the solution population to
improve on these points to counter the problem population
and so forth. Whereas a standard genetic algorithm will only
focus on the overall score. Another advantage is the use of
memory. Each individual has a chance to climb in rank if the
opposing population changes or descend when they are no
longer good against it. As opposed to staying in a spot that is
no longer accurate. The changing of rank is important as their
rank dictates their chance or reproduction and being used for
an encounter.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
Several experiments have been done in order to obtain more
information on the differences between the algorithms that
were discussed earlier and which of these have the highest
potential of finding a solution to our problem. For each ex-
periment, every algorithm other than co-evolution and fitness
diversity driven co-evolution used the reproduction method
where half the population is eliminated and reproduced. The
co-evolutionary algorithms only had two offspring each gen-
eration. The reason is that in co-evolution each individual has
a memory which can change over its life-time, hence this
method of reproduction is more appropriate.
The experiments performed correspond to the subsections
in chapter Methods and Materials, and have been executed in
the same order.
Every experiment run will have the following settings unless
otherwise stated.
population
size
max num-
ber of gen-
erations
mutation
(slightly)
mutation
(randomly
generated)
new
individuals
per
generation
50 200 0.6 0.4 25
TABLE IV: Standard experiment settings.
A. Experiment One
The first experiment is regarding selection methods. By
learning how different selection methods behave on the gener-
ated data we can determine which should be used to have the
best basic genetic algorithm for our problem. This best version
will also be used as a baseline to which other algorithms can be
compared. In order to learn this, a basic version of the genetic
algorithm was run on a data set generated by the simulation.
This was done 5 times and each time a different selection
method was used. Tournament selection was done 2 times,
once with a tournament size of 5 and once with size 2 as
this changes the selection pressure. Also, Boltzmann selection
relies on knowing the number of generations in advance,
however it is not possible to provide this information. Instead
it was decided that it has a maximum of 50 generations, after
that the selection probabilities will stay the same. 50 was
chosen because it is small enough such that it could yield
good results but also large enough to allow enough time for
both exploration and exploitation. They are compared based
on how quickly they minimized the error below a threshold.
The settings are as shown in table IV. Ideally these numbers
would be quite a bit higher but due to hardware and time
constraints these values have been used.
B. Experiment Two
The second experiment was to compare the basic genetic
algorithm from the first experiment with the island model. This
experiment is in order to see how well the basic algorithm
handles the problem in comparison to an algorithm with
more resources, namely the extra islands and migration, which
should help in getting out of local optima. This will also
show if it is even beneficial to use the island model in the
first place. The island model will have four islands, each
with a different selection method. In the previous experiment
a population of 50 was used and 25 new individuals per
generation. However since splitting a population of 50 over 4
algorithms would likely render all of them much weaker, both
the basic algorithm and the island model will have a population
of 100 and have 50 new individuals per generation. Meaning
6
each algorithm in the island model will have a population of
25.
The islands will be connected using a circular connection
and migration will take place every 7 generations. The circular
connection is used to ensure that all islands will, after at
least two migrations, be working on the best or previous
best solution. Thus allowing each individual island to try and
improve it. 7 generations was chosen as generally, after 5
generation the algorithm would stagnate.
C. Experiment Three
The third experiment was to try fitness-diversity driven co-
evolution and compare it to the previous two algorithms with
the intention of learning which algorithm will eventually be
used on the actual data sets. It should be noted however that
comparing the co-evolutionary algorithms to the other two is
a little tricky as they used different approaches to the repro-
duction step. For the island model and the basic algorithm,
one generation entails 50 new individuals whereas for fitness-
diversity driven co-evolution, one generation entails 2 new
individuals. To be able to compare how many generations each
algorithm needed, 25 generations for fitness-diversity driven
co-evolution will be counted as one generation.
D. Experiment Four
The fourth and final experiment is to use both the baseline
genetic algorithm and the best algorithm on four of the actual
data sets and compare the two as well as see if a good solution
has been found. However, since fitness-diversity driven co-
evolution takes much more time to compute what is essentially
one generation, it is likely that the baseline algorithm will be
better as it has many more chances to improve compared to
fitness-diversity driven co-evolution. Ideally both algorithms
could run for the same amount of generations but this is simply
not feasible.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
As discussed in the previous chapter, four experiments have
been performed of which the results are shown below. The first
experiment was to compare the different selection methods.
The results of which can be found in table V and figure
3. While each selection method naturally yielded a different
result they were found not to be significantly different as can
be seen in table V.
method one method two p-value FDR
roulette tournament n = 2 0.085637 0.171274
roulette tournament n = 5 0.11028 0.176448
roulette Boltzmann 0.468966 0.625288
roulette rank 0.817754 0.934576
TABLE V: comparing selection methods based on efficiency
In table V, each row compares how likely it is that the two
selection methods found in the first two columns have the
same distribution and provides the corresponding p-value and
false discovery rate. Where roulette selection was the baseline
to which the other selection methods were compared.
Fig. 3: selection method comparison
The whisker plot in figure 3 shows the different distributions
each selection method yielded. The y-axis is the number of
generations and the x-axis are the selection methods as shown
by the legend. While the results are not significantly different,
roulette selection and rank selection performed relatively well
compared to the others.
These results are fairly surprising as each selection method
has a distinct approach to applying selection pressure. Yet,
they appear to not be very different. For example, roulette
selection has a high selection pressure in the initial stages
of the run when there is a relatively large difference in
the fitness of each individual. While at the later stages the
selection pressure reduces as the fitness for the individuals
become more similar. On the other hand we have Boltzmann
selection, This method has a low selection pressure at the
start but, over time, its selection pressure increases. However,
despite them being so different they are not significantly
different.
Something that is worth noting in table V is that the p-value
for comparing roulette and tournament n = 2 is low enough
that there is a possibility of there being a trend. Which would
make sense since the selection pressure of tournament n = 2
is sufficiently low that the required number of generations is
higher due to the fact that this method does not utilize its
good solutions enough. The p-value for comparing roulette
and tournament n = 5 is also relatively low, being 0.11028.
This is likely due to tournament n = 5 having such a high
selection pressure that it easily gets stuck in local optima
causing it to require a fairly large amount of generations as
well. Rank selection seems to be a middle ground in terms
of selection pressure between the two tournament selections
as its distribution appears to be more similar to the selection
methods that apply dynamic selection pressure being roulette
and Boltzmann.
While this experiment yielded no clear results, experiments
from two other papers, namely ”Genetic Algorithm
Performance with Different Selection Strategies in Solving
TSP” [13] and ”Comparison of performance between
7
different selection strategies on genetic algorithm with course
timetabling problem” [14] did obtain distinct results. The
first paper applied rank selection, tournament selection and
proportional roulette wheel selection on the traveling salesmen
problem. They concluded that rank selection was the best
method for the task, then tournament and finally roulette
wheel and that the latter two scaled poorly compared to rank
selection. The second paper however, tried the same selection
methods on the course timetabling problem and found that
roulette wheel selection yielded the best results. It would
appear that depending on the problem, different selection
methods are more suitable and settings such as mutation rate
and the type of crossover seem to impact these results as well.
Despite the lack of conclusive results, one selection method
needs to be chosen to be used in the baseline algorithm. Both
roulette and rank selection preformed well and even though
rank selection has a lower mean, roulette selection has a
lower minimum which is why roulette selection is chosen to
be used in the baseline algorithm.
The second and third experiments were to compare the three
algorithms to each other. Being the baseline algorithm, island
model and the fitness diversity driven co-evolution. From the
previous experiment we now know that the selection method
does not particularly matter but roulette selection is used as the
baseline. Each algorithm had a population of a 100 and 50 new
individuals per generation. The results of these experiments
can be found in table VI and figure 4.
TABLE VI: Comparing algorithms based on efficiency
Table VI shows the result of comparing how likely it is
that the distribution of each algorithm is the same as another
algorithm. Each row compares the two algorithms in the first
two columns and shows the corresponding p-value and the
false discovery rate. The first row however, compares the the
baseline algorithm but with different population sizes of size
50 and a 100. It is interesting to note that the distribution for
these two are nearly identical. Why this is the case is unclear
but a possible explanation might be that for the data that was
tested on, a population of 50 encompasses enough variation
such that a higher population will not create meaningful
variation and instead generates duplicates. This table also
shows that none of the three algorithms are likely to come
from the same distribution as all the p-values are less than
0.05.
algorithm one algorithm two p-value FDR
roulette n = 100 roulette n = 50 0.953051 0.953051
roulette n = 100 island model 0.006436 0.017162667
roulette n = 100 fitness diversity
driven co-evolution
0.002334 0.017162667
island model fitness diversity
driven co-evolution
0.00431 0.017162667
Fig. 4: algorithm comparison
The whisker plot in figure 4 shows the number of gener-
ations that each algorithm needed to reach an error of less
than a predetermined value. The y-axis shows the number of
generations and the x-axis are the algorithms as shown in the
legend. From the plot we can see the means of the results for
each algorithm. It also shows that as the algorithms perform
better, the standard deviation (SD) of the results become less
as well. These values can be found in table VII.
Algorithms roulette 100 island model fitness diversity driven co-
evolution
Mean 77.3 41.3 20.1 SD
32.5
17.6
10.6
TABLE VII: Mean and Standard Deviation
The results from table VII are to be expected. The baseline
algorithm simply aims to improve the fitness doing nothing
but selecting parents using roulette selection and hoping that
it somehow works out. Which is a successful approach, just
not very efficient.
Whereas the island model uses different islands which
allow it to tackle the problem in 4 different ways since
they each have a different population. It is also possible
that each island is exploring a different peak in the search
space and when a solution is found that does not correspond
to the island it was created on, there might be another
island that is better equipped to improve on it. If this
is the case then providing this algorithm with more island
would likely improve its performance, ideally having for every
peak in the search space at least one island that is exploring it.
An observation that was made during the experiment was
that improvements of the best fitness had a tendency to take
place 0 to 3 iterations after migration had happened. Of course
these are not the only times that an improvement was found
but, nevertheless, it seems to confirm the idea that combining
the islands helps in getting out of local optima or improve
on an existing solution. Figure 5 helps to illustrate this. The
migrations took place at generation 0, 7, 14, 21, 28, 35, 42
and 49 as is shown by the arrows in the figure.
8
Fig. 5: island model run
Figure 5 shows improvements at generation 1, 8, 11, 15,
17, 22, 24, 39, 47 and 50. Out of these ten improvements,
4 of them occurred one generation after migration had taken
place, namely: 8, 15, 22 and 50. And an additional 3 occurred
within three generations after migration namely: 11, 17, 24.
Only the improvements at 39 and 47 are further away from
migration generations. At generation 0 migration also takes
place to ensure all island are trying to improve the same
current best solution. But, since the first generation of a run
nearly always shows improvement, this generation is left out
of the discussion.
Finally, the fitness diversity driven co-evolutionary
algorithm. It uses a different approach to avoiding local
optima compared to the island model and relies less on
luck. By using a form of novelty search it actively seeks
out individuals from the opposing population to challenge
the solutions using problems that they have not encountered
before or nearly as much as others. This combined with the
dynamic rank selection allows it to avoid local optima as
much as possible. Which, looking at the results, seems to
be very effective. However, while it needed less generations
to find a solution within the error margin, it needs to run
many more simulations causing it to take longer in real time
to find a solution as compared to the other algorithms. If
stronger hardware was available and more cores then this
would be less influential but unfortunately this is not an option.
The fourth and final experiment was to see how both the
baseline algorithm and fitness diversity driven co-evolution
performed on the real data. For this experiment the algorithms
were allowed to run for one day per data set. The results can
be found in table VIII.
TABLE VIII: experiment four results
Table VIII shows the results of the baseline algorithm and
data Roulette
generation
Roulette
best cost
FDDC
generation
FDDC best
cost
5K 1801 13.3815 42 21.7358
10K 1217 105.5283 56 108.5352
20K 1192 129.7423 44 131.7344
30K 1159 285.9435 27 340.2589
fitness diversity driven co-evolution. For each data set it shows
for how many generations each algorithm was run and the
corresponding lowest cost.
As we can see, fitness diversity driven co-evolution only
has access to a very small amount of generations compared
to the baseline algorithm. But, surprisingly, its results are not
much worse than the baseline algorithm. We can also clearly
see that as the data sets become larger, the cost increases by
a large amount. This is likely due to the fact that the graph
that it generates has many more points above zero and thus
more points that it needs to match exactly. Therefore, the
cumulative error increases by a large margin as well. Another
possible cause can be that the data used in experiment four
are not ideal as discussed in section Data. This is because
the data suffers from measurement errors, or noise if you
will. This is an issue for three reasons. One, it can be that
the data can not be recreated by the simulation which could
potentially cause the algorithm to never be able to find a
good solution. Or two, the algorithm tries to learn the noisy
parts of the data causing it to learn flawed data possibly using
tricks such as lowering the amount of molecules to obtain
more random solutions. Or three, The noise is not prevalent
enough for it to change the learning process but it does cause
mismatches. These issues can result in an increased cost value.
During the experiments it was found that any given data set
has quite a few different solutions. When an algorithm found a
solution with a cost lower then a specified value, the solution
was always different from the ones that were found before.
This would suggest that the fitness landscape has a fairly large
number of peaks of which many are also good solutions. A
fitness landscape is often depicted as a mountain range. It
encompasses all possible solutions where the best solutions are
found at the peaks whereas the worst are found in the valleys.
If such a landscape is rugged it makes the problem of finding
the optimal solution harder. It would appear that the fitness
landscape in our problem is indeed quite rugged. To illustrate
this, look at table IX. In table IX we see five different solutions
that were all deemed to be good solutions. These were found
on the generated data. In the last column we find the values
that originally generated the data. Each column is one solution
and each row is a different parameter containing the rounded
values. The last parameter, death spawns new monomer, was
set to 1.
As we can see, while different solutions can have some
parameter values in common, none of them are the same.
Meaning they are from different peaks in the fitness landscape.
This can be a problem because during the reproductive step,
when two individuals are selected to reproduce and they are
individuals exploring two different optima then their child is
likely to produce bad results as it will lie between the two
optima. And as was discussed earlier, the fitness landscape
of the data has many peaks causing this to occur quite
frequently. A solution to this problem can be to use speciation.
In particular adaptive species discovery [15] as it can be
used without much knowledge about the fitness landscape.
Speciation is to put individuals from a population that are
similar in terms of their genes together and create a sub
9
parameter solution
1
solution
2
solution
3
solution
4
solution
5
original
simulation
time
1799 667 1387 1636 2461 1211
number
of
molecules
107165 110906 113789 84572 118005 71142
monomer
pool
4343174 4502729 4749888 3466567 4800417 2911369
probability
of growth
0.55 0.81 0.88 0.72 0.54 0.72
probability
of death
0.00056 0.00113 0.00112 0.00083 0.00056 0.00084
probability
of death
reaction
0.65 0.75 0.48 0.51 0.38 0.73
living ex-
ponent
0.50 0.45 0.76 0.16 0.16 0.41
death ex-
ponent
0.19 0.35 0.57 0.53 0.23 0.75
living
naked
0.79 0.63 0.49 0.81 1 0.24
death
spawns
new
1 1 1 1 1 1
monomer
TABLE IX: different solutions to the same problem
population or species. Then, instead of selecting parents to
reproduce from the entire population, parents will be selected
from the same species. This would allow individuals to breed
with another individual from the same peak and consequently
have a higher chance of resulting in a child with a lower cost
value.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper compares different approaches to genetic al-
gorithms to find the optimal approach to try and solve the
problem of finding the values to the function that generates
data in order to find a match to real data sets. The explored
approaches are to make use of different selection methods,
island model and fitness diversity driven co-evolution. It was
found that while the fitness functions did seem to yield
some differences, they were not different enough for the
results to be significantly different. Both the island model
and fitness-diversity driven co-evolution performed well but
fitness-diversity driven co-evolution turned out to be the best
algorithm of the three. It also came to light that the data that
was originally used to train was altered and therefore unusable
for training purposes. What’s more is that the data contains
noise which also hindered the process. The data provided
turned out to have many peaks in its search space and would
possibly be better handled by speciation. Finally, while the
algorithms can approximate the data fairly well, as the data
sets get larger the minimum cost for each data set increases
dramatically.
REFERENCES
[1] Jordy van Appeven, Rouven Bonke, Chinmay Dhawan, Jan Lucas, and
Migena Luli. Understanding polymer growth. 2018.
[2] Nisha Saini. Review of selection methods in genetic algorithms. Inter-
national Journal Of Engineering And Computer Science, 6(10):22261–
22263, 2017.
[3] Colin Reeves. Genetic Algorithms, volume 146, pages 109–139. 09
2010.
[4] Riccardo Poli, William Langdon, and Nicholas Mcphee. A Field Guide
to Genetic Programming. lulu, 01 2008.
[5] John H. Holland. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems. Univer-
sity of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI, 1975. second edition, 1992.
[6] Francisco Herrera and Manuel Lozano. Gradual distributed genetic
algorithms. Evolutionary Computation, IEEE Transactions on, 4:43 –
63, 05 2000.
[7] Jan Paredis. Coevolutionary computation. Artificial life, 2:355–75, 02
1995.
[8] Fabian Franz, Jan Paredis, and Rico M¨ ockel. On the combination of
coevolution and novelty search. pages 201–208, 06 2017.
[9] Bryn D. Monnery, Valentin V. Jerca, Ondrej Sedlacek, Bart Ver-
braeken, Rachel Cavill, and Richard Hoogenboom. Defined high molar
mass poly(2-oxazoline)s. Angewandte Chemie-International Edition,
57(47):15400–15404, November 2018. c ⃝ 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag
GmbH Co. KGaA, Weinheim.
[10] W. Hillis. Co-evolving parasites improve simulated evolution as an
optimization procedure. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0167-2789(90)90076-
2, 42, 06 1990.
[11] Jan Paredis. Symbiotic coevolution for epistatic problems. pages 228–
232, 01 1996.
[12] Joel Lehman and Kenneth Stanley. Abandoning objectives: Evolution
through the search for novelty alone. Evolutionary computation, 19:189–
223, 06 2011.
[13] Noraini Razali and John Geraghty. Genetic algorithm performance with
different selection strategies in solving tsp. volume 2, 01 2011.
[14] Wutthipong Chinnasri and Nidapan Sureerattanan. Comparison of
performance between different selection strategies on genetic algorithm
with course timetabling problem. volume 2, pages 105 – 108, 08 2010.
[15] Antonio Della Cioppa, Angelo Marcelli, and Prisco Napoli. Speciation
in evolutionary algorithms: Adaptive species discovery. pages 1053–